Add proposal OS API and OS internal Traffic TLS encryption and PKI (#370)
SovereignCloudStack/standards: Standards/scs-XXXX-v1-encrypted-internal-openstack-traffic-and-pki-infra.md

---
title: OpenStack API and OpenStack internal Traffic TLS encryption and PKI Infrastructure
type: Decision Record
status: Draft
track: IaaS
---

## Introduction

OpenStack is a platform used for the SCS IaaS layer (Infrastructure as a Service).

> Currently, the deployment is mostly done using [Kolla](https://opendev.org/openstack/kolla-ansible).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, the deployment is done via [OSISM](https://github.com/osism/) which makes heavy use of [Kolla](https://opendev.org/openstack/kolla-ansible).
```

> This ADR document current status of Kolla in regard to end-to-end TLS encryption of selected OpenStack services shown below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ADR documents the current status of Kolla in regard to end-to-end TLS encryption of selected OpenStack services shown below.
```

Kolla, out of the box, can encrypt internal traffic using a HAProxy. [Details](https://docs.openstack.org/kolla-ansible/latest/admin/tls.html#tls-configuration-for-internal-external-vip)

##### HAProxy to backend services

```
   EC            --|TLS|--         HA          --|TLS|--                   OS
(External)   (public internet) (HAProxy) (OpenStack Networking)   (OpenStack Services)
   |                                                                  |      |      |
 Client                                                           Keystone  Glance  Placement ...
```

The communication from HAproxy to respective services is much harder to intercept as this traffic is internal to OpenStack; however, here, an attacker is possible from one compromised service to intercept all API traffic. 

Kolla enables end-to-end TLS encryption from HAProxy to services that support TLS Termination, currently out of the services of interest, the following services are supported:

1. Keystone
2. Horizon
3. Glance
4. Cinder
5. Placement
6. Nova
7. Netron
8. Heat
13. OpenVSwitch

> Only RabbitMQ is not currently supported.

Reviewer 2: there is interest in adding an internal CA for rabbitmq and libvirt TLS support, see:

https://etherpad.opendev.org/p/kolla-caracal-ptg#L283

the problematic part currently is, choosing the appropriate CA software, which has many challenges, as can be seen in the linked document where we evaluated various alternatives.

> [Details](https://docs.openstack.org/kolla-ansible/latest/admin/tls.html#back-end-tls-configuration)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Details](https://docs.openstack.org/kolla-ansible/2023.1/admin/tls.html#back-end-tls-configuration)
```

#### Backend services to their data services

```
   EC            --|TLS|--         HA          --|TLS|--                   OS             --|TLS|--                  DS
(External)   (public internet) (HAProxy) (OpenStack Networking)   (OpenStack Services)  (OpenStack Networking)  (Data Service)
   |                                                                  |      |      |                            |         |
 Client                                                           Keystone  Glance  Placement ...               MariaDB   Redis ...
```

To provide truly end-to-end traffic encryption within our infrastructure, all communications between services and their respective databases and brokers must be conducted via TLS (Transport Layer Security). This measure not only encrypts the data in transit but also ensures the communication channels are authenticated and integrity-protected.

##### Memcached

> Memcached does support TLS; however, this support is only [experimental](https://github.com/memcached/memcached/commit/ee1cfe3bf9384d1a93545fc942e25bed6437d910), and custom build binaries are needed. For our use case, this is a no-go.

Reviewer 2: so what do we do with this?

Kolla does not currently support the installation of MariaDB with TLS enabled.

##### RabbitMQ

RabbitMQ does support TLS encryption for connection as well as for inter-node communication. [Details](https://www.rabbitmq.com/ssl.html)

Kolla currently supports encryption of:
* client-server traffic, typically between OpenStack services using the oslo.messaging library and RabbitMQ
* RabbitMQ Management API and UI (frontend connection to HAProxy only)

And does not support encryption of:
* RabbitMQ cluster traffic between RabbitMQ server nodes
* RabbitMQ CLI communication with RabbitMQ server nodes
* RabbitMQ Management API and UI (backend connection from HAProxy to RabbitMQ)

[Details](https://docs.openstack.org/kolla-ansible/latest/reference/message-queues/rabbitmq.html#tls-encryption)

##### Redis

Redis supports TLS encryption for client and inter-node communication; however, this has to be enabled during the build and is not feature-enabled by default.
[Details](https://redis.io/docs/management/security/encryption/)

Kolla currently does not support TLS encryption.

Note: We had issues with `oslo.cache` connecting via TLS to redis, minor upstream change might be needed.

> 

Reviewer 2: I miss a paragraph about secure libvirt live migration:

https://docs.openstack.org/nova/latest/admin/secure-live-migration-with-qemu-native-tls.html
